	My experience on this troubleshooting subject? If I have recalled that moment when Engr. Castro remarked us with 
something about computer basics precisely and correctly, this is what he said, “Dile man lage mo mutingog? Wa jud moy 
ikatubag? Mahimo man kaha mog computer engineers puhon? Pero mismo pagtubag ug basics about computers, dle ninyo mahimo.”. 
If I remember, it was on interfacing subject, 6pm and in room 311. He somehow said it like that. We were silent because 
he was on point. Did you get the idea? We’re computer engineering students that doesn’t know about computer basics. 
Even though we’re taking this course, are we really computer literate?

	I have classmates which does not know how to operate, fix or troubleshoot a computer. I won’t tell who they are but 
I can say in our section, at least 3 person knows how to BDO (We Find Ways) a computer perhaps. They do not even know what 
this part can do and the name of that basic specific part, they don’t even know. If you can only read the previous 
conversation on our section’s group chat, you can read questions regarding how to troubleshoot a laptop that won’t detect a 
wifi. Heck, even a pc that won’t turn on, they don’t know what to do. They do not know what a ram can do, is it necessary 
for gaming and applications like Adobe Photoshop, Matlab, Eagle and other software? You name them. They don’t even know that 
rams are replaceable. This proves that even the most basics of all basics about computer, they don’t know about it. 
How much more about troubleshooting?

	It kind of angered me how they don’t know about these things and they’ll just ask about it like, “hey, how do you 
replace a ram inside a laptop?”. We are in an epoch where information is freely available and just one type on a browser and 
enter it away, BOOM! Information is all yours. Why can’t they do that? But they can do search about Korean things, actors and 
actress things, what’s trending things and you name them things but cannot even do “What can I do with my pc’s problem” 
things. Remember, we are computer engineering students but doesn’t know about computer basics. Isn’t it laughable?

	Yeah. Okay. I get it. These people did not age with the use of computers or there is no pc available on their homes. 
They lack the knowledge because it isn’t freely available in their reach. But that excuse won’t hinder them for learning the 
basics. We’re on our fourth year here in BISU. A year or so, we’ll graduate in God’s will. But, isn’t it an insult to those 
who have graduated already? Those who have graduated and studied computers? Oh, they’ll graduate soon but with not enough 
knowledge about computer basics.

	I can say that one factor that affects us is the institution’s way of teaching. I quote from  Association for 
Computing Machinery (ACM), “Computer Engineering is defined as the discipline that embodies the science and technology of 
design, construction, implementation, and maintenance of software and hardware components of modern computing systems and 
computer-controlled equipment.”. Software and hardware. As you can see, the institution greatly teaches us about software 
but on the hardware side, it’s unsatisfactory. If I could put it on a percentage view, software would be 75% and hardware 
would be 25%. It should be balanced but that’s what I see, and I experience. I’m entitled with my own opinion, right?

	I have great expectations on this subject. To be honest, I do. I have expected that this subject would teach my 
classmates about computer basics which they still don’t know about and a lot of hands-on about maintenance and troubleshooting 
on software and hardware side. But the semester is ending. Again, I have expected a lot of hands-on or practical exams 
regarding this subject but yeah, I shouldn’t have expected. This subject was meant to be full of practical exams or a lot of 
hands-on works. But what this subject did was just reporting and copy pasting, and a little bit of hands-on where a group of 
12 people troubleshoot a CPU. Do you really think those 12 students learned a single thing on that hands-on? To be prolly 
honest? Nope. It should have been labored individually, a pair could have sufficed. But 12 students on a single CPU? And 12 
students on a single Raspberry Pie board? Nope. The knowledge that would have been acquired by the students is now on that 
sole student who had troubleshoot the actual thing. Those remaining students have just watched him did it. Never did touched 
nor did a hands-on on that troubleshooting activity.

	It frustrated me how my expectations weren’t reached. From the subject description itself, Troubleshooting of Computer 
Systems. Troubleshooting should be equal to practical work. This subject was more on theory, not on practical drills and 
hands-on activities. I get why my expectations weren’t reached, it was because the institution does not have enough resources 
for our field. Even though the scenario is currently like that, the administrators or the teachers could have found another way 
to cope with the lack of resource, they should have been the resourceful one. They shouldn’t have done it with “Search this and 
Report This”. It’s all theory, never been drilled on. It could have sufficed if 3 or 4 pairs of students do a practical drill 
on a PC an hour or on every class meeting. Any activities that would help the students touch their troubleshooting skills 
recently acquired by theories. It should’ve been all hands-on with a bit of theory and not all theories with a bit of practical 
activities.

	I’m disappointed because I have put my expectations real high. I’m disappointed how my classmates doesn’t know about 
basic computer things, much more about troubleshooting and maintenance. I’m disappointed on how the institution focus on software 
but not really hardware, it should have been balanced. I’m disappointed on how practical exams were conducted. It was supposed to 
be hands-on, not written. Although it would suffice but practical exams would be the best idea. I’m disappointed on how the 
institution doesn’t have enough resource for our field. I thought the new curriculum was about self-learning? Yes, self-learning. 
But the institution should have interfered with it, they should have compensated the lack of resources for the sake of the 
knowledge of their students. The lack of resources made it much more difficult for the students to acquire knowledge particularly 
those who doesn’t own a computer due to poverty. There are many ways to learn and acquire knowledge but experience is the best 
teacher.
